Basic Tools FOr Environment Setup that are used in KPIT: 
Please go through in depth on these services we will connect later
1. Consul
2. Keycloak And Cognito
3. Postgresql
4. Jhipster
5. Microservices
6. Monoliths
7. Gateway
8. Git (create your own project in Git and push changes there by creating and forking out branches)
9. SpringBoot Framework
10. node setup through nvm
11. angular-cli
12. SageMaker , Glue, DataBrew , QuickSight, Athena 





Open Jdk
python
docker
postgresql
consul
vscode














Amazon Cognito lets you add user sign-up, sign-in, and access control to your web and mobile apps quickly and easily.
Keycloak is an open source identity and access management solution for modern Applications and Services. Add authentication to applications and secure services with minimum fuss.

Amazon Cognito and Keycloak are both identity management solutions that provide authentication and user management capabilities, but they differ in terms of deployment, integration options, and feature sets.

Amazon Cognito is a fully managed service provided by AWS that offers user authentication, authorization, and user management functionalities. It is primarily designed for cloud-based applications and supports integration with other AWS services. Amazon Cognito provides features such as user sign-up and sign-in, social identity provider integration, multi-factor authentication, and user attribute management. It also offers built-in support for mobile and web applications and provides easy integration with AWS ecosystem services.

Keycloak, on the other hand, is an open-source identity and access management (IAM) solution. It is self-hosted and can be deployed on-premises or in the cloud. Keycloak offers features like user authentication, authorization, user federation, single sign-on (SSO), and social login. It supports various identity protocols, including OpenID Connect and SAML, and provides extensive customization and configuration options.

One key difference is that Amazon Cognito is a fully managed service, while Keycloak requires self-hosting and management. Additionally, Amazon Cognito is tightly integrated with the AWS ecosystem, making it convenient for developers using AWS services. Keycloak, being an open-source solution, offers greater customization and flexibility in terms of deployment options and feature extensions.



Docker Daemon - The background service running on the host that manages building, running and distributing Docker containers. The daemon is the process that runs in the operating system which clients talk to.
Docker Client - The command line tool that allows the user to interact with the daemon. More generally, there can be other forms of clients too - such as Kitematic which provide a GUI to the users.
Docker Hub - A registry of Docker images. You can think of the registry as a directory of all available Docker images. If required, one can host their own Docker registries and can use them for pulling images.



Monolithic

Microservices

Built as a single unit application

Built as a combination of multiple interconnected services that are run independently

Easier deployment

Complex deployment

Re-usability is difficult

Re-usability is simple

Single codebase

Multiple code files

Useful for smaller projects

Useful for complex projects

Easier testing 

Difficult testing and debugging




How Gateways Work?
The gateway receives data from devices within the network.
After receiving data the gateway intercept and analyze data packets, which include analyzing packet header, payload etc.
Based on the analysis of the data packets, the gateway calculate an appropriate destination address of data packet. It then routes the data packets to their destination address.
In some cases, the gateway might also want to transform the format of the obtained data to ensure compatibility at the receiver.
Once the data packets have been analyzed, routed, and converted, then the gateway sends the last packets to their respective destinations address inside the network.


Advantages of Gateways
Gateway helps in connecting two different network.
Gateway is used to filters and does not allow anything that can harm to the network.
Gateway is worked as the protocol converter.
Gateway is the highly secure device that provides security from external attacks.

Limitations of Gateways
There are few limitations of gateways as well. Here are some of them:
Gateway causes time delay since the conversion of data according to the network requires time.
Failure of the gateway might lead to the failure of connection with other networks.
The implementation of Gateway is very complex and it is not cost efficient.
Gateway is hard to manage

